Rule-based  methods:
Rule-based  PG  methods build  on  a  set  of  paraphrase  rules  
or  patterns, which  are  either  hand  crafted  or  automatically 
collected.    In  the  early  rule-based  PG  research, the 
paraphrase rules are generally manually written (McKeown,  1979;  
Zong et al.,  2001),  which is expensive and arduous.  Some researchers 
then tried to automatically extract paraphrase rules (Lin and Pantel,  
2001;  Barzilay and Lee,  2003;  Zhao et al., 2008b), which facilitates 
the rule-based PG methods.   However,  it  has  been  shown  that  the
coverage  of  the  paraphrase  patterns  is  not  high enough, especially 
when the used paraphrase patterns are long or complicated (Quirk et al., 2004).

Thesaurus-based methods:
The thesaurus-based methods generate a paraphrase t for a source sentence s 
by  substituting  some  words  in s with their  synonyms  (Bolshakov  and  
Gelbukh,  2004; Kauchak and Barzilay, 2006). This kind of method usually 
involves two phases, i.e., candidate extraction and paraphrase validation.  
In the first phase, it extracts all synonyms from a thesaurus, such as
WordNet, for the words to be substituted.  In the second phase,  it selects 
an optimal substitute for each given word from the synonyms according to
the context in s. This kind of method is simple, since the thesaurus synonyms 
are easy to access. However,  it cannot generate other types of paraphrases 
but only synonym substitution.

NLG-based methods:
NLG-based methods (Kozlowski et al., 2003; Power and Scott, 2005) generally  
involve  two  stages.    In  the  first  one,  the source sentence s is 
transformed into its semantic representation r by  undertaking  a  series  
of  NLP processing, including morphology analyzing, syntactic parsing, semantic 
role labeling, etc.  In the second stage, a NLG system is employed to generate 
a sentence t from r. s and t are paraphrases as they are both derived from
r.  The NLG-based methods  simulate  human  paraphrasing  behavior, i.e.,  
understanding a sentence and presenting the meaning in another way.  However, 
deep analysis of sentences is a big challenge.  Moreover, developing a NLG 
system is also not trivial.

SMT-based   methods:
SMT-based   methods viewed PG as monolingual MT, i.e., translating s into
t that are in the same language.  Researchers employ the existing SMT models for 
PG (Quirk et  al.,  2004).    Similar  to  typical  SMT,  a  large parallel  corpus  
is  needed  as  training  data  in  the SMT-based PG. However,  such data are 
difficult to acquire compared with the SMT data.  Therefore,  data shortage 
becomes the major limitation of the method.  To address this problem, we have
tried combining multiple resources to improve the SMT-based PG model 
(Zhao et al., 2008a). There have been researchers trying to propose uniform  PG  
methods  for  multiple  applications. But  they  are  either  rule-based  (Murata  
and  Isahara, 2001;  Takahashi et al., 2001) or thesaurus-based (Bolshakov and 
Gelbukh, 2004), thus they have  some  limitations  as  stated  above.   Furthermore, 
few of them conducted formal experiments to evaluate the proposed methods.